plotnine skill announcement (#214)
posit-dev/open-source-website: content/blog/plotnine-skill-announcement/index.qmd

---
title: "A Plotnine Skill for AI Coding Agents"
date: 2026-04-29
people:
  - Hassan Kibirige
description: >
  An installable skill that helps coding Agents produce consistent,
  runnable plotnine code. It is usable from any Agent that supports the Agent Skills standard.
image: "hero.jpg"

> image-alt: "The plotnine hex logo on the left — a UFO over a starry sky beaming a violet tractor beam onto small data-visualization icons, labelled 'plotnine'. The beam extends across a dark, starlit canvas to three minimalist robot faces representing AI agents. Wordmark on the right reads 'plotnine skill — for AI coding agents.'"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
image-alt: "The plotnine hex logo on the left — a UFO over a starry sky beaming a violet tractor beam onto small data-visualization icons, labelled 'plotnine'. The beam extends across a dark, starlit canvas to three minimalist robot faces representing AI agents getting progressively happier. Wordmark on the right reads 'plotnine skill — for AI coding agents.'"
```

topics:
  - Visualization
  - Artificial Intelligence
software:
  - plotnine
languages:
  - Python
source: plotnine
tags:
  - AI
  - Agent Skills
---

We now have a [plotnine skill](https://github.com/has2k1/plotnine-skill) for AI Agents.
If you write plotnine and use AI coding assistants day-to-day, this is for you.
It targets the [Agent Skills](https://agentskills.io) standard, so it works across any Agent that supports skills (Claude Code, Codex, and others) and helps an Agent produce consistent, runnable plotnine code.

## Install

Install once:

```sh

> npx skills add has2k1/plotnine-skill

Reviewer: It would be good to lead with a python native installation pathway, that doesn't require users to have `npx` installed. Maybe something like:

```sh
pip install plotnine
plotnine install-skill
```
or
```sh
pip install plotnine
python -c 'import plotnine; plotnine.ai.install_skill()'
```
or 
```sh
uvx skillsmd add has2k1/plotnine-skill
```
or 
```python
import plotnine
plotnine.ai.install_skill()
```

Author: For now the python way can be `uvx skillsmd add has2k1/plotnine-skill`, then add something like `plotnine install-skill` in the next version of plotnine.

Compare the results for the above prompt _with_ skill and _without_ skill.

::: {.panel-tabset}

## With Skill

```{python}
#| label: penguins-skill

from plotnine import ggplot, aes, geom_point, geom_smooth, scale_color_brewer, labs
from plotnine.data import penguins

(
    ggplot(
        penguins.dropna(),
        aes(x="bill_length_mm", y="bill_depth_mm", color="species"),
    )
    + geom_point(size=2, alpha=0.7)
    + geom_smooth(method="lm", se=True, alpha=0.2)
    + scale_color_brewer(type="qual", palette="Set2")
    + labs(
        x="Bill Length (mm)",
        y="Bill Depth (mm)",
        title="Penguin Bill Dimensions by Species",
        color="Species",
    )
)
```

## No Skill

```python
from plotnine import aes, geom_point, geom_smooth, ggplot, scale_color_brewer
from plotnine.data import penguins

p = (
    ggplot(penguins, aes(x="bill_length_mm", y="bill_depth_mm", color="species"))
    + geom_point(alpha=0.7)
    + geom_smooth(method="lm", se=True)
    + scale_color_brewer(type="qual", palette="Dark2")
)
                       

> p.save("scatter_penguins.png", width=8, height=6, dpi=100)

Reviewer: Toggeling between 'With Skill' and 'No Skill' tabsets causes the image produced to jump around, making it very hard to compare. Would inserting some empty lines here, so that the vertical height of the code chunk in both tabsets is the same, make it easier to compare?

Author: I just ~discovered~ rediscovered the [contents](https://quarto.org/docs/authoring/contents.html) shortcode to place output above the code.

from plotnine.data import penguins

(
    ggplot(penguins, aes(x="bill_length_mm", y="bill_depth_mm", color="species"))
    + geom_point(alpha=0.7)
    + geom_smooth(method="lm", se=True)
    + scale_color_brewer(type="qual", palette="Dark2")
)
```
:::

Note that even without a skill, the Agent (Claude Code Opus 4.6) generates readable and idiomatic code.
The differences then map directly to some of the aspects that the skill enforces. In this case they are:

1. **Accessibility** — axis labels with units (where possible) and a real title
2. **Data Completeness** — `penguins.dropna()` means that the smoother isn't quietly skipping rows.

As Agents are prone to doing, without a skill the Agent was presumptuous and generated code to save the plot to a file.
The skill makes that experience tighter with fewer surprises, fewer fixes after the fact.

## What is next?

We want this skill to rock, hard, and this is only the beginning.
The vibes may seem good but, with intent, we want to build a sense of where the skill reliably helps and where it does not, so that performance and improvements are grounded in more formal evidence rather than vibes.

> Your feedback can help. If you try it, tell us how it performs, the prompts it surprisingly handled well, the ones where it slipped and those where it can be exceptional.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Your feedback can help. If you try it, tell us how it performs, the prompts it surprisingly handled well, the ones where it slipped, and those where it was exceptional.
```

Author: There are 3 cases. I guess a better order can be bad, great and can-be great.

```suggestion
Your feedback can help. If you try it, tell us how it performs; the prompts it handled poorly, those were it was surprisingly exceptional, and even those where it was good but it can be exceptional.
```
